# Comp-702
This  repository is about the Diabetic Retinopathy Detection using deep learning frame works like CNN and Vision Transformer(ViT). This work was done as a part of the Masters dissertation(COMP 702) for the course Big Data and High-Performance Computing in University of Liverpool.

For the training, I planned to exlplore the benefits of GPU based training and Parallel training using single and multi-nodes. For single GPU training, I used Kaggle and Colab, and multi, I planned to use University of Liverpool's HPC system. Due to high demands, the HPC clusters were very limitedly available, and the idea of multi node was dropped for the time. 

Among the models, the Vision Transformer was the most complex one as it was developed from scratch and had many layers and processes compared with others. The other two models were Pretrained, and fine tuned for my project. 

## Problem Statement
Currently, DR is being diagnosed clinically, and usually it takes much time in places where there is limited access to healthcare. The treatment and detection of DR is always a challenging task. It is done by experts by examining the fundus images. The manual process is always giving accurate results (Hemanth, Deperlioglu and Kose, 2019), because of the experienced professionals. But on the other hand, it tends to be slow as the proportion of the patients with the medical staff will be always higher. Usually, human efforts take around 7 – 14 days under professionals (Nguyen et al., 2020). Since there is a scarcity of highly trained staff, patients often must wait for long, and it results in severe vision loss (NHS, 2017). There are limitations with hospitals in hiring more staff as it can severely affect their budget and because of infrastructure limitations.
The solution is to completely automate the process, as said in the above section. it can help hospitals who are struggling with infrastructure and budget limitations. Routine check-up for eye on a given period is usually once in a year for diabetic patients, and with the population and limited availability of resources, it is a herculean task (NHS, 2019). with the latest technology support, it can be made possible without harming the environment or without consuming much of the resources.

## Approach
The idea of developing a tool can be achieved by using the technologies of Machine Learning, to be more specific, Deep Learning and computer vision (Rafi and Alavi, 2017). The process of detection and classification is done by examining the retinal fundus images, which are obtained from several types of scans. With the development of convolutional neural networks (CNN), it was a breakthrough in using computer vision in medical field (Schwartz et al., 2019). There is wide research going on with detection of cancer, chest infections, fractures etc, which relived the burden on the medical professionals. the CNNs (Convolutional Neural Networks) were able to learn more features and patterns with the help of GPU enabled training, which increased the image quality fed into the networks. In addition to this, the Electronic Data Records in hospitals can have a huge availability of the targeted data, which can be used to improve the model performance.
In addition to the CNNs, I will be using Vision Transformer (ViT), the computer vision network inspired from state-of-the-art ViT for Natural Language Processing. In this research project, I will be evaluating both the approaches, and will be closely examining whether the newly developed ViT can outperform the current best, the CNNs.
